​

​I was unable to work on Round 1 coding because Jesmer did not provide help with Tensorflow, and I did not know anything about Tensorflow.  Jesmer understood that I​ am incapable of doing it alone, but he ignored my email asking him some questions about some Tensorflow demo code, that I was trying to understand.

I complained to Alison and she thought I was annoying and she said that I should just focus on my "job", even though I explained to her that teamwork requires cooperation and I cannot function alone.  I completed my part of the RNN AI, and also completed the API which I wasn't familiar at all, and is outside of my expertise (I am more of a researcher than a developer) but I still managed to finish the API.  We just needed a few lines of code to integrate the front-end with my AI back-end, but you (星爺) ignored me till the end, never communicating with me, so my AI failed to be demo'd to the judges.

I got angry and reprimanded people because my earliest complaints were ignored.  Alison did not think that my complaints need to be addressed, but I think she mishandled it.  So I started explaining more, and I used strong language to express my discontent.  But I was treated unfairly in the first place.  It got worse because the others continued to ignore my complaints.

You (星爺) did not say that you were disturbed by my communications.  You just ignored me without any explanations.  Even if you feel offended by my language, you should have pointed it out instead of simply ignoring me and refusing to cooperate, especially when my complaint is precisely about the uncooperativeness.

I know that the word "jealous" may sound offensive, but when a teammate refuses to share information with me, thus trying to claim more credits to himself, blocking my chance to get my share of credits, then it is quite appropriately called jealousy.

If the issue is really about my use of foul language, then:
1.  I am willing to tone down my language in the future
2.  I heard Edelweiss using swear words in casual chat as well
3.  Why didn't you point it out instead of suddenly stopping all communications and cooperation?  when there was no consensus that such language automatically disqualifies me as a teammate?

I was not making FALSE accusations.

I was making REAL accusations, but they were IGNORED.

A massive number of people in HK and in China may be jealous of my accomplishments -- you may laugh at it, but you can't automatically assume that I must be mistaken.  You have to have a clear reason to refuse to work with me, but you did not provide such reasons.

Your whole team's silence itself speaks louder because all of you seem to be embarrassed to admit something, and that thing may very well be jealousy.

I am not saying that all of you have committed something unforgivable, but I think you have made mistakes in this event.  But you are students and I am willing to forgive such mistakes and continue to work with you.

HK people are not familiar with the idea of discrimination because colonialism has taught us to be docile, and has left us psychologically damaged.  We can't tell what is right and wrong because colonialism told us that orders were given from above by white people only.  Nowadays you may find this idea absurd when you hear it.  And if that's the case, we should not have discrimination in the work place.  
