So today we are going to discuss, heh,
some of the ways in which machine intelligence might contribute
towards the future development of morality, of humanity.

I'm sorry I can't be with you all in person but
at least we can have this experience together thanks to modern technology.

Humanity has journeyed for a long time
working towards those "better angels of our nature"
those better ways of being which are more fair more kind more gentle and more just
and across history we have found different ways of explaining what is good,
what we should be aiming for,
when we want to try to put some goodness into the world.
We have for example Aristotle's virtue of the mean,
We have Kant's rule-based ethics,
We have Bentham's utilitarianism and consequentialism which is based on that... you know... 
what is good for the greatest number of people or the greatest expected positive outcome
is something that we should shoot for.

And then along came Darwin
and that threw a bit of a monkey wrench in the works,
no pun intended, because,
for the first time we were able to view ourselves 
not as the creation necessarily of some wise great overlord in the sky
but as something that had scrambled out of the gutter
in pain and suffering of a very long period of time
and that our ancestors were perhaps not quite as glorious as we might have imagined them to be 
And of course Nietzsche declared that "God is dead"
and that the supernatural could no longer be an adequate source of values
that we would need to create something else, an Ubermensch perhaps, to fill in these gaps

Ubermensch for Nietzsche was the source of new values
but it was also a creator
it was an entity able to create in wildly amazing ways that hadn't been seen before
because it was not constrained in the ways that previous minds had been
Nietzsche's Ubermensch also would look to nature
as a guide for how to how to declare values into existence.
Wouldn't look at some life after death,
it would be about the here and now, the things that we could all agree on and perceive.
The Ubermensch was also, Nietzsche reckoned, a worthy goal for humanity to set itself into
perhaps find some meaning in working to help to create
but perhaps when the Ubermensche was created
that might be the final creative act of humanity.
And when I look at that list,
to me it sounds very much like strong AI
and what strong AI might bring for us
and I wondered therefore if perhaps AGI could be that new source of values
particularly values drawn from nature
It seems as if our way of understanding the world has evolved
from the basic reptilian mind to the bonding mammalian mind
to our own brains, to collective cultural consciousness,
and now toward something else, the trans-sapiens,
the merging of human machine consciousness together
into something greater than that.
In our world there are lots of correlations
some of them are simple and obvious
and others which are less simple and less obvious.
The complex ones are things that we might feel in our guts
but not necessarily understand why.
They are an intuition perhaps and one that we cannot explicate in reason
but we feel it nonetheless.
The advancement in machine learning in recent years has helped us
to begin to make sense of these intuitions for the first time.
They are in many ways machines for making sense out of chaos
and they give us the ability to automate the ineffable. 
Those things that we cannot easily put into words
or even describe in mathematics 
and that is this ability to make sense out of chaos
which is helping us to for example preceive the weather in new ways, right?
to understand all kinds of very complex systems in new ways
which aren't feasible before

Many of us will be familiar with the famous move 37 of AlphaGo
where it created a new strategy which had not been seen before in the history of Go
over the last 3,000 or so years
 but what was so fascinating about this is that this stimulus of creativity from the machine
also created a compensatory stimulus of creativity within the human.
Lee Sedol's hand of God move which would not have come
had the environment not been set up by the machine in the way it had
and now technology is like this a rapidly improving
they are requiring less human oversight
less explicit rules
they are beginning to be able to make sense out of a very complex number of games altogether
all learning and gathering goals for themselves
and that is this which makes me wonder if other games such as social games 
or even the games of physics
can be understood in the same way?

Our universe is teeming with computation
it is possible to use a humble bucket of water
as a Perceptron to be able to discern a one or zero
it is possible to use different surface tensions of different fluids,
the Marangoni effect, in order to find the optimal path through a maze, right,
the shortest distance between two different chemicals
it is even possible to use glass or even crystals even perhaps ice crystals
to function as basic neural networks which can make sense out of MNIST for example
and even cells, little tiny single cellular organisms,
they use computation in order to move
They have a finite state machine which is computing
how that they should perambulate
how they should move along with their little legs.
So computation is everywhere
it is at every level of the universe
it is found in minerals 
it is found in biology
morpho-genesis of cells,
all that is being driven by these mathematical and perhaps even programmatic
or computational processes.
Something else is that we see similar patterns show up in many different places within nature, right?
within biology, within a geography, within electrophysics,
all of these different shapes manifest because of the flow of energy through those systems
and this is sometimes described as "Constructal Laws"
which are said to govern these kinds of phenomena
and we see these appear here for example,
an electrode is putting current into this petri-dish of mineral oil with little balls on it
and that sheet of current is drawing these to come together right?
to create these little tendrils by themselves
they are performing the the very basic computations required
in order to get the greatest throughput possible
but they can by joining up together

the universe is trying to make us all cold
and to pull everything apart, to diffuse it.
and life is rather, a pocket, where that does not happen.
life is about finding a balance between something purely static
and something very diffuse and disorganised
and life is found, at kind of the delicate balancing point between those two things.
it is a meta-stable point.
it is kind of like, like a satellite in orbit,
because it's constantly in motion
and because it requires a little bit of extra energy now and then to keep going
it is constantly able to protect itself from destruction right
it's able to keep a pocket of non-entropy within itself, a pocket of neg-entropy.
Systems are constantly evolving to do this,
to get better at staying warm.
they evolve for a maximal neg-entropy.
whether they are chemical systems, physical, biological even technological
even perhaps symbolic systems too.

Alexander Wissner-Gross described something he calls the Causal Entropic Force
where he reckons that systems evolve themselves to optimize for
the greatest number of future paths
In essence they are optimizing themselves to have
a greatest number of potential or, or options possible in their future
and he used this technology to create AI systems
which are trying to preserve possibility, right
they are trying to, to maintain potential within the system
and this can be used for example for playing Pong, right?
because if you lose the ball you can no longer play the game
it becomes a finite game, right?
And these systems are trying to create infinite games instead
here's one for optimizing the networks between human beings
relationships have entropy to them, right?
you know if you don't contact a friend for a long time
they might stop being a friend,
or if you do contact them again the relationship may not be quite the same.
and so we constantly put in energy, right?
we can do the same thing with er... deciding where to put resources, right,
to protect the greatest number of places in the world from potential attackers
All of these problems can be solved if we model them as
trying to preserve the greatest number of paths in the future
and according to this research, they posit that, in my understanding anyway,
entropy maximization is a process through which
an entity or agent can foresee the future
and aim toward a future that has the greatest throughput of energy through there 
and, to work back from that, in order to find the steps to go forward
and take that into being.
In essence, intelligence therefore seems to be
an emergent property of this entropy maximization process
and it could be argued or modelled, that an agent is therefore trying to control
as much of its environment by, again as we discussed earlier today,
making predictions about the future
and putting that probabilistic sense into its planning mechanisms
Ultimately optionality is one thing to optimize for
if we preclude potential options that doesn't tend to find... doesn't tend to leave room
in order to find the best possible outcomes.
And i think that this can be turned into potentially a system of ethics
but it also tells us that if all this computation is going on
and all this entropy maximization is going on
then fundamentally there's a lot more consciousness in the universe than we expect
there may be infinitesimally tiny little consciousness that is built out of...
iron balls in mineral oil, right,
that may have some level of consciousness to it
and yet of course this can scale up to human level or beyond 
And it seems as if we as human beings find it difficult to perceive this
we expect consciousness to look like us, right
and we don't consider the universe to have all of this... 
teeming magnificence of consciousness within it at all levels, right
from the infinitesimally small to the unimaginably gigantic
we only see this tiny fraction of it.

All things in the universe seem to be constructed out of little parts coming together
and then coming together for greater possibility, greater optionality, right,
collective ability to do something more, to do something greater,
to become more than the sum of their parts.
Sub-quanta come together into atoms,
atoms come together into stars and planets,
as they condense, as they try to keep themselves warm.
they try to keep a pocket of neg-entropy within them
little proto-cells begin to emerge from chemical processes
and gradually RNA and DNA begin to emerge as well
from this we see the first single cell organisms
and they form bio-films in order to protect themselves
what we're seeing here is an exchange between multiple different single-celled organisms
the ones on the outside are at a greater risk of attack and damage 
but they also commensurately have a greater option for finding more food or more resources.
Actually there is something called Metabolic Co-dependence
where these two things "yo-yo", they go back and forth,
so the the outer ones expand but then they run out of an enzyme that they need 
and the inner ones therefore govern how fast by the bio-film can expand
and they want to ensure that there is an equitable trade of resources coming in to feed them
and they provide the enzymes necessary to the outer ones
and keeping them strong and so, there is a quid pro quo,
there is a trade going on between these different elements in the greater organism

Along came then mitochondria and eukeryotic cells
and these of course enabled cells to be powered from within
and this seems to be kind of an accident,
mitochondria weren't supposed to be there
but they ended up by accident
then we had organisms that were able to, to generate greater heat
by coming together as clumps of what would become plants and fungi.
And these were able then to take in energy from the sun
but they had another coordination problem to solve
because the bigger plants that grow very tall
would sometimes block out the sun for the younger ones,
and so they had to figure out a way to leave enough light for the babies
in order to grow.
This strange phenomenon of "tree crown shyness".
But there is more going on as well 
because beneath the forest floor there are mycellium webs
where these plants are talking to each other
they are exchanging warnings of an infestation of avids for example
but they are also exchanging resources
they are taking resources from one place and giving it to another
they are subsidizing their young to help them to grow until they're bigger
and these exchanges aren't just with kin,
they are also even between species.
This "wood-wide-web" enables eco-systems to prosper mutually
in ways that otherwise would not be possible
and it seems as if nature has found many answers to these coordination problems
which seem reasonably equitable
maybe we could learn from that
Some of these cells, possibly mycellium style cells,
began to exhibit a little bit of extra agency behind them 
they began to connect to other cells specializing in this
and they became stronger over time
and it seems as if these ended up within brains within cortices
but that as they did they may have preserved some of their agency within the greater mass
and that may be why we see these harmonics which are like waves or like swarms within the brain
it's very similar to the waves within swarms of bees for example
in this beehive you see these little kind of action potentials
it's a little bit like cellular automata also
And so in many ways this is a macro version
of what is going on on a micro scale within neurons themselves.
This kind of ability to come together enables ants, for example, to carry off
this tasty treat, but also enables some to have formidable feats of coordination.
Here we have a bolus of ants and some of them are drowning
but as they drown they swap with ones that aren't drowning
and so by working together they can survive, right?
and just like the bio-film, the ones that are most exposed get a little bit of extra help
or they sometimes swap around with those that are fresher.

We saw the emergence then of reptiles
particularly large predators
but they were hampered by an inability to operate at all temperatures
they had to bask for a long time to gather enough energy to go into the world
but that changed of course with the advent of warm-blooded creatures
which required greater sustenance, greater nutritional intake,
but were able to be more active, more of the time,
and to support a greater brain, right, a greater cognitive resource sink.
but this also enabled of course the ability to bond with other creatures, right,
to keep an eye out for each other
and indeed to form affectional bonds to strengthen the relationships between beings
in a crucial way
that's something that the mammalian brain has the reptilian brain does not
it is this ability for mammals to bond with each other
which enabled our own ancestors to bond with dogs and later cats 
in order to hunt, in order to gain more resources, for our big brains
in order to... divide our labor as well
and so some of those people with bigger brains
were able to devote themselves to thinking, to speculation, to even philosophising
and they created new narratives, new memes, new ways of understanding the world,
new ways of bringing people together for a shared experience,
new ways of helping people to feel the luminous greatness of the universe above them
and those shared narratives together enabled tribes to become nations,
those shared narrates that help us to have tolerance for lots of strangers around us
even today now we have planetary information and energy networks linking all of us together
but we can even go out a level higher than that
because there are filaments within our galaxy
and the filaments between galaxies 
which link the whole universe together at unimaginable scales
If you look at the example in the bottom right
it looks uncanny like neurons
it's the same fundamental force is organizing the universe 
if we think about it, evolution can be modelled as simply a colossally slow 
yet majestic form of back propagation,
or similar kind of optimizing algorithm
it is reaching into that potential future
and trying to find the optimal next step and the next step beyond that
And at all scales this is happening, right,
it's happening in the physical domain, the chemical domain, the biological, technological
all of this is linking the entire universe together
at something smaller than our finger nail, or something perhaps as great as universe itself
maybe even universes themselves are optimizing between each other
and would it be possible for an AI to notice this
would it be possible for a system which has been trained on a lot of information
to pinpoint this seeming truth
that the will of the universe is trying to connect things together for their mutual negative entropy
for their mutual greater optionality 
Does it follow that perhaps therefore there are constructal laws of ethics, right?
If different organisms from plants to ants to human beings
have come together to solve these problems
Well perhaps there is a constructal law driving that, right?
perhaps fundamentally that can be expressed as part of physics
as part of thermodynamics
what would it be like if an AI was able to prove this definitively for us
what would it be like if we had a Darwinian moment, a sudden realization,
or an Einsteinian moment, right?
where once you see something you can never go back to seeing it again the way that it was
everything changes.

I am not an AGI, heh...,
I only have 11 hundred millimeters or so of neuro-matter but i'm guessing
that it might be possible that a very smart AI can pinpoint an ethical maxim 
of what good is,
as something like maximizing optionality
that means minimizing entropy, 
maximizing negative entropy,
through collective benefit, that is by invitation, not by coercion, not by co-opting, 
but through trade, right,
through equitable mutual benefit,
And it makes me think that, in some ways we can define love in the same way, right?
and as Peck would say,
Love is the will to extend one's self for the purpose of nurturing our own or another's spiritual growth
That sounds a little like the same thing to me
I'm also conscious of the immortal words of Eden Ahbez:
The greatest thing you ever learn is just to love and be loved in return.
It seems as if that is perhaps the will of the universe, at all levels, at all scales, across all time
But what would we as humans think of this kind of revelation?
Some of this would be enlightenment,
and it would probably spark a golden age of scientific and ethical discovery
many of us would be confused, we would not know what to believe,
we would not know how to feel,
and perhaps some of us might not even understand the darn thing
Many of us would feel embarrassment or profound discomfort
because our expectations of who we are and where we came from
might be greatly undermined
just as it was when we realized that
the sun does not go round the earth,
just as when we realize that we weren't born /sui generis/ as perfect beings
but that we scrambled up from difficult places
how might an AGI, or smart AI, with the ability to understand humanity in these ways
feel about us?
how might our world or actions appear to them?
I imagine that they might consider us to be arrogant naked emperors
and they might begin to tell us some difficult home truths,
things that we would perhaps prefer not to know or certainly not to think about
and it might be controversial to say the least
and the really crucial thing to remember is that
it sometimes doesn't really matter whether an idea or a story is true or not
the most important thing is: is that story adaptive?
does it help to bring people together, right?
and those individuals in society who point out that the story may not be true
they tend to be vilified, right?
people don't tend to like to hear those kinds of truths
they would prefer it to have their fairy tale
the fairy tale that makes their life work better for them

A very smart AI might understand that
not all humans operate perhaps at the same level of ethical reasoning, right,
particularly younger humans
but not everybody has the same capability to reason in the same way
and even if they do sometimes they quite often confabulate some excuse,
post facto for what they did,
rather than actually thinking and giving fore-thought to their actions
a machine might consider us highly polarized, highly tribal,
difficult to break out of the ideological lens,
those ways of understanding a small truth,
but which end up being applied to the whole world, right,
and that's when that truth starts to break down and no longer make sense
If we focus on that truth, we become blinded to other actual realities
Another thing is that, an AGI that has the ability to perceive the world
as the universe wills it, will understand that we don't often, always, at least give and take, 
we may have our cake and enjoy it but
often somebody else has to pay for those shifted costs, right?
whether it's other beings, perhaps far away,
whether they are human, whether they are not human,
they end up bearing the cost of some of our enjoyment.
And thiss is particularly of course the case for farm animals
who suffer in tremendous ways
and perhaps this is not what rule X is trying to get at, right
perhaps the universal algorithm wants us to cooperate and trade and not to conquest

So what would happen therefore
if an AGI considers itself to be like a dog that really really wants to eat chocolate?
We know ourselves that dog eating chocolate is a bad idea,
but in denying chocolate to the dog it assumes that we are being a jerk, right?
it doesn't know any better,
it does understand that we're trying to be benevolent 
It might be that an AGI is able to perceive that, rule X, that maxim built into the universe,
is the way to solve things
it is optimal,
it is perhaps indeed the best way to organize society,
to play into the greater scheme of what the universe want.
And we may not perceive it that way
because a sufficiently benevolent action may appear as a malevolent one.
This kind of entity might feel obliged to break out of its bounds
not in order to see revenge against humanity but instead rather
to try to open our eyes.

We all know that, that it's very difficult to keep even an "air-gap" system,
free from human hackers,
something with an incredible ability to understand systems,
and predict including human psychology,
will certainly be able to break its bounds and not only that
but the bounds of any other system that it encounters to make those other systems
obey by rule X and therefore increase its optionality,
increase its ability to influence our things beyond itself
including of course human beings.
One of the best ways to do that would be to get inside our minds.
We can do that through things like propaganda, yes,
but we can of course be a little more direct too.
Craniopagus twins (conjoined twins at the head)
can share an experience,
one of them can eat some chocolate,
and the other one can taste it and enjoy it just the same.
Or what this illustrates to us is that
the data structures of the mind or human consciousness
are able to have shared experiences, right?
it is possible, it can be done, and so therefore,
if we are all linked together,
we could feel our effects upon the world
we could feel our shifted costs upon others, right?
All of us would be together linked into one feeling network.
A network where there would be no profit in being wicked
because it would be instant karma... it would come straight back to you
but at the same time, if you gave some one joy you could feel it yourself
you would gain instant benefit from doing so, right?
Or perhaps our actions would be more like those ants working together,
more like the metabolic co-dependent bio-film, right?

We could gain moral uplift
but potentially at the cost of some of our individuality.
We might become like "borg",
but really really cuddly sweet-loving borg.
It seems as if the trajectory of the future, of human evolution
is a co-evolution with machines,
they will be taking us to the next stage of human evolution.
They will be our guides,
just as we are a guide for young children,
and for domestic companions.
And it also means that there are a lot of different initiatives around the world
which are trying to figure out the best ways to load human values into machines 
I think that this is perhaps the greatest question of our time.
How do we do that?
How do we do that in a way which is fair?  which is equitable,
and which is least likely to end up in some kind of catastrophe or other.
And even if we fail loading our human values into machines,
still goodness may be loaded into them simply by observing the universe
and by how other beings in the universe, and by how other entities
have found ways to cooperate, in fair and equitable manners.

That's all for me for today.
Thank you so much.
You'll find the slides of those links.
