歷史上，烏克蘭 第一次獨立 是在 16－17 世紀。 當時 Cossacks 的遊牧民族 出現了一個領袖 Bohdan Khmelnytsky 帶領 烏克蘭人獨立，但佢後來同俄羅斯沙皇簽署和約，結果烏克蘭被俄國支配。 現在烏克蘭人視他為民族英雄，但亦因為他簽署的和約，在後世備受爭議。

--------------------------------
Kiev 被 蒙古帝國入侵，導致 俄羅斯人的權力中心 shift 咗去 Moscow (之後發展成 Romanov 王朝，亦即 Ivan the Terrible, Peter and Catherine the Great, etc).  當蒙古帝國離開之後，原本 Kiev 的地方被其他人侵佔，包括 Polish, Slavic, Tartar (有土耳其血統), Cossack, 等。 這些人的混合組成 Ruthenes 也就是講 Ukraine 語言的民族起源。 （如有錯誤請糾正，這是我的理解。）

換句話說，在 Rus 人眼中，蒙古人是不正義的入侵者，所以 Kiev 應該仍然屬於他們的。 而其後的 Ukraine 人只是佔領了從蒙古人撤退之後的空間。 這種邏輯跟 猶太人的以色列復國主義是一樣的 ——— 猶太人被羅馬帝國逐出以色列，開始了兩千年的流亡，現在要重新佔領他們的 “promised land".

但我們忽略了，Kiev 其實也是 Rus 人侵略別人的土地，他們來自 Finland 等地。 類似地，猶太人，身為奴隸逃出了埃及，而戰勝了當時的以色列原居民 ——— 這是他們自己的舊約聖經的說法。 就算聖經是虛構，我們也基本上可以肯定，猶太人曾經侵佔了以色列更早的定居者。 

所以，正因為有歷史記錄，有些人對於他們祖先的土地，會有某種「偏執狂」。 

土地向來是人類激烈爭奪的資源。 我沒有終極的答案，但我相信將歷史釐清是會幫助我們尋找更好的解決方案。 我覺得答案不會在歷史裏面，而是存在於未來。 如果淨係睇歷史，我們只會學到  曹操 劉備 那些東西。 歷史不可以不看，但答案並不完全在歷史裏面。

Kiev was attacked and subjugated by Mongol Empire, which led to the center of power shifting to Moscow (later, the Romanov dynasty, Ivan the Terrible, Peter and Catherine the Great, etc).  Now, after Mongol power subsided, the area was filled in by other people, with a mix of Slavic, Polish, Tartar, Cossack, etc.  Here emerges an identity known as "Ruthenes" who speaks the Ukraine language.  (Correct me if I'm wrong, this is my understanding).

In other words, if the Rus people view the Mongol invasion as "unjust", then indeed, Kiev should have belonged to them, and the later Ukrainian people merely "filled in" the space left behind by the unjust invaders.  This is very much the same logic as Jewish Zionism --- the Roman Empire drove out Jews to a two-thousand-year diaspora, and now they're trying to claim back the "promised" land.

But we overlooked the fact that Kievan Rus were also people who came from Scandinavia and invaded the land around Kiev.  Likewise, the Jews were also outsiders who invaded Jerusalem, according to the Old Testament -- their own account.  Even if the Bible could be fictional, we can be almost certain that Jews had seized the land from earlier settlers.

In both cases, the historical record created an obsession in the minds of people, whereas the lack of historical records saved us from such obsessions.

Land is vital for human survival and has always been fought over, even at the expense of human lives.  I'm not saying I have the final answer, but by clarifying the historical context we may get closer to better solutions.  The solution never exists in the past, it exists in the future.  But we have to look into the past to figure out the future.