Ch4.  THE ABILITY TO THINK AND TO MAKE AND CARRY OUT DECISIONS: SCHIZOPHRENIA
Schizophrenia probably begins before birth, but it usually doesn't become apparent until late adolescence or early adulthood. When it does appear, schizophrenia often has devastating effects on thinking, volition, behavior, memory, and social interaction—the underpinnings of our sense of self—just at the time in their lives when young people are becoming independent. Like depression and bipolar disorder, schizophrenia is a complex psychiatric disorder affecting numerous regions of the brain and ultimately undermining the integrity of the self. 
The biology of schizophrenia is particularly difficult to sort out because of the disorder's wide-ranging effects on the brain and behavior. This chapter presents what brain scientists have been able to discover about schizophrenia thus far: what circuits it disrupts in the brain, what treatments are available to patients, and what genetic and developmental components underlie the disorder. The emerging view of schizophrenia as a neurodevelopmental disorder that, unlike autism, manifests itself later in life has arisen from the considerable genetic research done on the disease. 
Recent technical advances in genetics and brain imaging have given scientists new insights into the biology of schizophrenia. Based on those advances, we are now beginning to understand how schizophrenia affects the brain and to develop animal models that allow us to test specific hypotheses and to explore how the disease begins. These recent advances may provide a path to early intervention and treatment.
THE CORE SYMPTOMS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA 
Schizophrenia produces three types of symptoms, each resulting from disturbances in a different region of the brain. This makes schizophrenia a particularly difficult disorder to understand and to treat. 
The positive symptoms of schizophrenia—called "positive" not because they are good but because they represent new types of behavior for the person who has them—are the symptoms most frequently associated with the disease and the ones patients often recognize first. Positive symptoms reflect disordered volition and thinking. Disordered thought detaches a person from reality, leading to altered perceptions and behavior, such as hallucinations and delusions. These psychotic symptoms can be terrifying, not just for people who experience them but also for people who witness them. They are also a major cause of the stigma attached to people with schizophrenia. 
The English artist Louis Wain conveyed his experience of the positive symptoms of schizophrenia (notably, altered perception) in his drawings of cats (fig. 4.1). As Kraepelin appreciated, and as we shall see in chapter 6, remarkable artistic capabilities sometimes manifest themselves for the first time in people who have developed schizophrenia. Thus, artists who become schizophrenic may continue to paint, and some people with schizophrenia who never painted before may take up painting as a means of giving voice to their feelings. 
Hallucinations, the most common positive symptom, can be visual or auditory. Auditory hallucinations are very troubling: patients hear voices saying harshly critical, sometimes abusive things to them. The voices may cause them to harm themselves or others. Delusions, or false beliefs with no basis in fact, are also common. Of the several categories of delusions, the most common type is paranoid delusions. Patients often feel as though other people are out to get them, or following them, or trying to harm them. It is not uncommon for patients to believe that someone is trying to poison them, particularly with their medications. 
Another very common type of delusion involves reference, or control. Patients feel that they're receiving special messages, just for them, from the television or the radio; they often feel that other people can control their minds. Finally, patients may have delusions of grandeur, the feeling of having special powers. 
Figure 4.1. Drawings of cats by the artist Louis Wain (1860–1939), who had schizophrenia 
The negative symptoms of schizophrenia—social withdrawal and lack of motivation—are typically present before the positive symptoms, but they are generally overlooked until a person experiences a psychotic episode. Social withdrawal may not entail actually avoiding people but rather being walled off and wrapped up in a separate world. Lack of motivation is evident in listlessness and apathy. 
The cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia reflect problems with volition, with the executive functions involved in organizing one's life, and with working memory (a form of short-term memory), as well as early features of dementia. Patients are sometimes unable to gather their thoughts or to follow a train of thought. In addition, they may be unable to do the everyday things needed to be successful at work or to sustain relationships with others. As a result, they have great difficulty holding a job or marrying and raising children. 
Brain scans of untreated people with schizophrenia reveal, over time, a subtle, but perceptible, loss of gray matter, which contains the cell body and dendrites of neurons in the cerebral cortex. This loss of gray matter, whichcontributes to the cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia, is thought to result from excessive pruning of dendrites during development, which leads to loss of synaptic connections among neurons, as we shall see later in this chapter. 
To get a sense of how completely these symptoms of schizophrenia can loosen our hold on reality and sabotage our independence and sense of self, let us turn to someone who has the disorder: Elyn Saks (fig. 4.2), a professor of law at the University of Southern California and founder of the Saks Institute for Mental Health Law, Policy, and Ethics. In 2007 Saks published a book titled The Center Cannot Hold, in which she presents a frank and moving portrait of her experience of schizophrenia as well as a plea that we not impose limitations on people with schizophrenia but rather allow them to find their own limits. In September 2015 she was awarded a MacArthur Foundation "genius" grant. She described her terrifying initial psychotic experience: 
Figure 4.2. Elyn Saks 
It's ten o'clock on a Friday night. I am sitting with my two classmates in the Yale Law School Library. They aren't too happy about being here; it's the weekend, after all—there are plenty of other fun things they could be doing. But I am determined that we hold our small-group meeting. We have a memo assignment; we have to do it, have to finish it, have to produce it, have to ... Wait a minute. No, wait. "Memos are visitations," I announce. "They make certain points. The point is on your head. Have you ever killed anyone?" 
My study partners look at me as if they—or I—have been splashed with ice water. "This is a joke, right?" asks one. "What are you talking about, Elyn?" asks the other. 
"Oh, the usual. Heaven, and hell. Who's what, what's who. Hey!" I say, leaping out of my chair. "Let's go out on the roof!" 
I practically sprint to the nearest large window, climb through it, and step out onto the roof, followed a few moments later by my reluctant partners in crime. "This is the real me!" I announce, my arms waving above my head. "Come to the Florida lemon tree! Come to the Florida sunshine bush! Where they make lemons. Where there are demons. Hey, what's the matter with you guys?" 
"You're frightening me," one blurts out. A few uncertain moments later, "I'm going back inside," says the other. They look scared. Have they seen a ghost or something? And hey, wait a minute—they're scrambling back through the window. 
"Why are you going back in?" I ask. But they're already inside, and I'm alone. A few minutes later, somewhat reluctantly, I climb back through the window, too. 
Once we're all seated around the table again, I carefully stack my textbooks into a small tower, then rearrange my note pages. Then I rearrange them again. I can see the problem, but I can't see its solution. This is very worrisome. "I don't know if you're having the same experience of words jumping around the pages as I am," I say. "I think someone's infiltrated my copies of the cases. We've got to case the joint. I don't believe in joints. But they do hold your body together." I glance up from my papers to see my two colleagues staring at me. "I ... I have to go," says one. "Me, too," says the other. They seem nervous as they hurriedly pack up their stuff and leave, with a vague promise about catching up with me later and working on the memo then. 
I hide in the stacks until well after midnight, sitting on the floor muttering to myself. It grows quiet. The lights are being turned off. Frightened of being locked in, I finally scurry out, ducking through the shadowy library so as not to be seen by any security people. It's dark outside. I don't like the way it feels to walk back to my dorm. And once there, I can't sleep anyway. My head is too full of noise. Too full of lemons, and law memos, and mass murders that I will be responsible for. I have to work. I cannot work. I cannot think. [1] 
HISTORY OF SCHIZOPHRENIA 
As we learned in chapter 3, Emil Kraepelin, the founder of modern scientific psychiatry, divided the major psychiatric illnesses into disorders of mood and disorders of thought. He was able to make this distinction because he brought to his studies of mental illness not only very astute clinical observations but also his training in the laboratory of Wilhelm Wundt, the pioneer of experimental psychology. Throughout his career Kraepelin strove to base the concepts of psychiatry on sound psychological research. 
Kraepelin called the primary disorder of thought dementia praecox, the dementia of young people, because it starts earlier in life than Alzheimer's dementia. Almost immediately, the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler took issue with the term. Bleuler thought dementia was only one component of the disease. Moreover, some of his patients had developed the disease later in life. Others functioned well after many years with the disease: they were able to work and have a family life. For these reasons, Bleuler called the disease the schizophrenias. He saw schizophrenia as a splitting of the mind—a disorientation of feelings from cognition and motivation—and he used the plural noun to recognize the several disorders embedded in this category. Bleuler's ideas are fundamental to our understanding of the disease, and his definition still holds. 
TREATING PEOPLE WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA 
Schizophrenia is not a rare disorder. It affects about 1 percent of people worldwide and roughly 3 million people in the United States. It strikes without regard to class, race, gender, or culture, and it varies greatly in severity. Many people with severe schizophrenia have difficulty forming or sustaining personal relationships, working, or even living independently. On the other hand, some people with milder forms of the disorder, such as the writer Jack Kerouac, the Nobel Prize winner in Economics John Nash, and the musician Brian Wilson, have had notable careers. Their symptoms are mostly kept in check by treatment with drugs and psychotherapy. 
The drugs developed to treat people with schizophrenia initially focused on alleviating the positive symptoms of the disorder—that is, the psychotic symptoms: hallucinations and delusions. Antipsychotic drugs have been quite effective; in fact, most of the drugs we have today will alleviate positive symptoms to some extent for up to 80 percent of people with schizophrenia. However, antipsychotics are not very effective against the negative and cognitive symptoms of the disorder—and those symptoms can be the mostpernicious and debilitating for patients. 
Psychotherapy is also an essential treatment for people with schizophrenia. Interestingly, psychotherapy is now being used preemptively as well, for both the cognitive and the negative symptoms, to try to prevent the onset of psychotic symptoms in adolescents and young adults identified as being at risk. One of the many things that psychotherapy can accomplish is to help patients realize that they have a disorder, a disease: they are not a bad person but a good person suffering from delusions or hallucinations. 
BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS 
Scientists got an initial glimpse into the biology of schizophrenia in the same way they got their initial look at the biology of depression—when the first effective drug appeared. In each case, that first drug emerged by chance, from drugs designed to work on another problem. 
Paul Charpentier, a French chemist working for the pharmaceutical firm Rhône-Poulenc, had begun work on an antihistamine that he hoped would be effective against allergies but without producing the numerous side effects of existing antihistamines. The drug he developed in 1950 was called Thorazine (its generic name is chlorpromazine). As Thorazine went into clinical trials, everyone was amazed at its effect: it made people calmer, much more relaxed. 
Seeing Thorazine's calming effects, Pierre Deniker and Jean Delay, two French psychiatrists, decided to give the drug to their psychotic patients. It was a magic bullet, particularly for their patients with schizophrenia. By 1954, when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the drug, 2 million people in the United States alone had been treated with Thorazine. A great many of them were able to leave state mental hospitals. 
Thorazine was originally thought to act as a tranquilizer, calming patients without sedating them unduly. However, by 1964 it became clear that Thorazine and related drugs produce specific effects on the positive symptoms of schizophrenia: they mitigate or abolish delusions, hallucinations, and some types of disordered thinking. Moreover, if patients take them during periods of remission, these antipsychotic drugs tend to reduce the rate of relapse. Yet the drugs have significant side effects, including neurological symptoms characteristic of Parkinson's disease. People taking the drugs develop a tremor of their hands, bend forward when they walk, and experience rigidity in their body. 
Scientists eventually developed new drugs with fewer and less severeneurological side effects. Those drugs include clozapine, risperidone, and olanzapine, and they all are effective at controlling positive symptoms of the disease. Only clozapine is considered to be more effective than the earlier antipsychotics in treating the negative symptoms and cognitive defects of schizophrenia, and then only marginally so. The newer drugs are referred to as "atypical" antipsychotics because they all produce fewer Parkinson's-like side effects than the earlier, "typical" drugs. 
The first clue to how typical antipsychotics work came from analysis of their neurological side effects. Since these drugs produce the same effects on movement as Parkinson's disease, which is caused by a deficiency in the modulatory neurotransmitter dopamine, scientists reasoned that the drugs might act by reducing dopamine in the brain. They also reasoned, by extension, that schizophrenia might result in part from excessive action of dopamine. In other words, reducing dopamine in the brain might account for both the drugs' therapeutic effects and their adverse side effects. 
How would this work? How could a drug produce both undesirable and beneficial effects? It depends on where in the brain the drug acts. 
When neurons release dopamine into a synapse, the dopamine ordinarily binds to receptors on target neurons. If those receptors are blocked by antipsychotics, the action of dopamine is attenuated. As it turns out, many typical antipsychotics act by blocking dopamine receptors. This finding bolstered the idea that either excessive dopamine production or an excessive number of dopamine receptors is an important factor in causing schizophrenia. It also supported the idea emerging from studies of Parkinson's disease that dopamine deficiency causes abnormal movement. Thus, understanding the role that dopamine plays in schizophrenia also taught us a bit more about the normal functioning of this neurotransmitter. 
Most dopamine-producing neurons are located in two clusters in the midbrain: the ventral tegmental area and the substantia nigra. The axons that extend outward from these two clusters of neurons form the neural circuits known as the dopaminergic pathways. Two of these dopaminergic pathways —the mesolimbic pathway and the nigrostriatal pathway—are the neural pathways primarily affected in schizophrenia and are therefore the most important ones to examine in looking for treatments (fig. 4.3). 
The mesolimbic pathway extends from the ventral tegmental area to parts of the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and nucleus accumbens. These regions are important for thought, memory, emotion, and behavior— the mental functions that are adversely affected by schizophrenia. Thenigrostriatal pathway begins in the substantia nigra and extends to the dorsal striatum, a region of the brain that is involved with spatial and motor functions. This is the pathway that degenerates in Parkinson's disease. Antipsychotic drugs act on both pathways, which explains how they can produce both therapeutic effects and adverse side effects. 
To test the validity of the idea that typical antipsychotics block dopamine receptors, scientists had to identify the specific dopamine receptors on which the drugs exert their effect. There are five major known types of dopamine receptors, D1 to D5. Typical antipsychotic drugs were found to have a high affinity for the D2 receptor; atypical antipsychotics have a lower affinity for this receptor. 
Figure 4.3. The two dopaminergic pathways affected by antipsychotic drugs: the mesolimbic pathway and the nigrostriatal pathway. Dopamine-producing neurons are concentrated in the ventral tegmental area, which transmits dopamine along the mesolimbic pathway, and in the substantia nigra, which sends dopamine along the nigrostriatal pathway. 
D2 receptors are normally present in particularly large numbers in the striatum and to a lesser extent in the amygdala, the hippocampus, and parts of the cerebral cortex. Research suggests that wholesale blocking of D2 receptors in the nigrostriatal pathway results in too little dopamine in regions of the striatum that require adequate dopamine for normal movement. This explains the Parkinson's-like effects of typical antipsychotics. Atypical antipsychotics also block the D2 receptors in the striatum, but because these drugs have a lower affinity for D2 receptors, they block fewer of them, thus leaving movement intact. 
Another way in which atypical antipsychotics differ from typical ones isthat their affinities are more diverse. Atypical antipsychotics bind to D4 dopamine receptors and to receptors for other modulatory neurotransmitters as well, notably serotonin and histamine. This diversity of action raises the possibility that schizophrenia involves abnormalities in serotonergic and histaminergic pathways as well as in dopaminergic pathways. 
EARLY INTERVENTION 
One key to improved treatment of any medical disorder is early intervention. Scientists have successfully identified high-risk lifestyles for a heart attack and have developed interventions to prevent them. Why not do the same for schizophrenia? 
We know that genetic and environmental factors act on the developing brain before birth and in early childhood to increase the risk of schizophrenia, and we may eventually be able to pinpoint them and intervene before the disease manifests itself years later. One genetic variation that acts on the developing brain has already been identified, as we shall see later. In addition, computerized brain imaging can sometimes indicate areas of increased dopamine activity, which might serve as a biomarker of the disease before psychosis develops. 
As we have seen, the first psychotic episode of schizophrenia is usually triggered in late adolescence or early adulthood, when the stresses of daily life can prove too heavy a burden to bear. If treatment is begun immediately, young people can usually be stabilized. All too often, however, they don't seek treatment until after they have been sick for several years. In addition, if a person with schizophrenia stops taking medication, the regulation of dopaminergic pathways and other neural circuits will be disrupted, and he or she will begin to experience symptoms again. 
The most promising preemptive treatment thus far is to provide cognitive psychotherapy to adolescents and young adults who exhibit early signs of schizophrenia, in what is known as the prodromal phase. These signs, which precede the first psychotic episode, are unfortunately a bit vague. A young person may be slightly depressed, not handling stress as well as usual, or feeling less inhibited than usual—often saying out loud what he or she is thinking. As we know, major psychiatric disorders are often characterized by exaggerations of everyday behavior, so initial, subtle changes can be difficult to recognize. 
Preemptive treatments are designed to help young people build up the cognitive capacity and executive functions of the prefrontal cortex thatregulate their ability to control their behavior. This will improve their ability to manage day-to-day stress and organize their lives more effectively, thereby reducing the likelihood that they will have a psychotic episode. 
PREDISPOSING ANATOMICAL ABNORMALITIES 
During pregnancy, environmental factors, such as nutritional deficits, infections, or exposure to stress or toxins, may interact with genes to increase the risk that the fetus will develop abnormally functioning dopaminergic pathways. Malfunctioning pathways set the stage for developing schizophrenia years later, when the brain of the adolescent responds to the stresses of everyday life by generating excessive dopamine. 
The same adverse environmental events or situations during pregnancy may also affect the way certain circuits in the prefrontal cortex develop, circuits that mediate the thinking and executive functions of the brain. Abnormalities in these neural circuits result in the cognitive symptoms that people with schizophrenia experience, notably a disturbance of working memory. 
Think of working memory as the ability to remember, for a short period of time, the information you need to guide your thoughts or behavior. Right now, you are using your working memory to keep in mind the points you just read so that the next thing you read will follow logically. Impaired working memory would make this difficult, just as it would make it hard for you to plan your day or hold a job. 
Working memory develops from childhood through the late teens, getting progressively better over time. At age seven, children who will be diagnosed with schizophrenia ten or fifteen years later have normal working memory. But by age thirteen, their working memory has fallen well below where it should be at that stage of development. A key component of working memory is the pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex, so called because the cell body of these neurons is shaped roughly like a triangle. In every other respect these cells are like other neurons, both structurally and functionally. 
As we have seen, neurons send information outward along the axon, which forms synaptic connections with a target cell's dendrites. Most of a pyramidal neuron's synapses are located on small protrusions from the dendrites called dendritic spines. The number of dendritic spines on a neuron is a rough measure of the amount and richness of the information it receives. 
Dendritic spines begin to form on pyramidal neurons during the third trimester of pregnancy. From then through the first few years of life, the number of dendritic spines, and the number of synapses on them, expands rapidly. In fact, a three-year-old's brain contains twice as many synapses as an adult's brain. Beginning at about puberty, synaptic pruning removes the dendritic spines that the brain isn't using, including spines that aren't actually helping working memory. Synaptic pruning becomes particularly active during adolescence and early adulthood. 
Figure 4.4. Pruning of a pyramidal neuron's dendritic outgrowth—the dendritic spines in the normal brain and the brain of someone with schizophrenia 
In schizophrenia, synaptic pruning appears to go haywire during adolescence, snipping off far too many dendritic spines (fig. 4.4). Consequently, the pyramidal neurons are left with too few synaptic connections in the prefrontal cortex to form the robust neural circuits we need for an adequate working memory and other complex cognitive functions. Thisexcessive-pruning hypothesis for schizophrenia, first proposed by Irwin Feinberg, now at the University of California, Davis, [2] has been documented by David Lewis and Jill Glausier at the University of Pittsburgh. [3] A similar defect is thought to affect pyramidal neurons located in the hippocampus of people with schizophrenia, which would adversely affect memory. 
Since synaptic pruning is designed to rid the brain of unused dendrites, Lewis reasoned that excessive pruning might be the result of not having enough dendrites in play—that is, something might be preventing the pyramidal neurons from receiving enough sensory signals to keep the dendritic spines busy and functional. The likely culprit in this case would be the thalamus, the part of the brain that is supposed to relay sensory signals to the prefrontal cortex. If the thalamus has fallen down on the job, it might be because the thalamus itself has lost cells. Indeed, some studies have found that the thalamus is smaller than normal in people with schizophrenia. 
Thus, schizophrenia presents quite a different problem than depression or bipolar disorder. As we saw in chapter 3, those disorders result from a functional defect, in which properly built neural circuits fail to work correctly. Such defects can often be reversed. Schizophrenia, like autism spectrum disorders, involves an anatomical defect, in which certain neural circuits fail to develop correctly. To remedy these anatomical defects in schizophrenia, scientists will have to think of some way to either intervene in synaptic pruning during development or create compounds that stimulate the growth of new spines later on. 
Schizophrenia is characterized by other anatomical abnormalities as well. These include a thinning of layers of gray matter in the temporal and parietal regions of the cortex and in the hippocampus, as well as dilation of the lateral ventricles, the hollow spaces that carry the cerebrospinal fluid. Enlargement of the lateral ventricles probably results secondarily from the loss of gray matter in the cortex. Like excessive synaptic pruning, these brain abnormalities appear early in life, which suggests that they contribute to the development of schizophrenia. The existence of anatomical abnormalities and their parallel to the emergence of cognitive symptoms have strengthened the longstanding belief that the cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia emerge from abnormal functioning of the gray matter of the cerebral cortex. 
THE GENETICS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA 
If you had an identical twin with schizophrenia, you would have about a 50- 50 chance of developing the disease, regardless of whether the two of youwere raised together or apart. That risk of developing schizophrenia is much higher than the 1 in 100 risk for the general population. The twin data tell us two things: first, schizophrenia has a strong genetic component, regardless of environment; and second, those genes can't be acting alone, because the risk isn't 100 percent. Genes and the environment must interact to cause the disease (fig. 4.5). 
In recent years, a collaboration involving many scientists and tens of thousands of schizophrenic patients and their families set out to understand that genetic risk. They wanted to know what genes contribute to the brain abnormalities of people with schizophrenia and what sorts of functions those genes mediate. 4 They found that even though symptoms of the disease don't appear until the late teens, many of the genes involved in schizophrenia act on the developing brain before birth. This finding is consistent with the fact that people are vulnerable to environmental risk factors early in life, even though they do not manifest signs of disease until much later. 
Scientists have recently come to appreciate that genetic variations that contribute to complex disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, or bipolar disorder may be either common or rare. A common variation is one that was introduced into the human genome many generations ago and is now present in more than 1 percent of the world's population; such variations are called polymorphisms. Rare variations, or mutations, occur in less than 1 percent of the world's population. Either type of variation can contribute to the likelihood of having a disease or developmental disorder. Each type of variation can predispose a person to schizophrenia. 
Figure 4.5. The genetic risk of developing schizophrenia. As this graph shows, the general population has a 1 in 100, or 1 percent, risk of developing schizophrenia, whereas relatives ofsomeone with the disorder have a higher risk, reaching almost 50 percent in identical twins. 
The rare variant mechanism of disease illustrates that rare mutations in a person's genome greatly increase that person's risk of developing a relatively common disorder. As we saw in chapter 2, a rare change in the structure of a chromosome, known as a copy number variation, can markedly increase the risk of autism spectrum disorders. The same is true of schizophrenia—in fact, the same copy number variation on chromosome 7 that increases the risk of autism spectrum disorders also increases the risk of schizophrenia. Moreover, as is the case with autism spectrum disorders, rare de novo mutations in DNA —mutations that occur spontaneously in the sperm of the father—increase the risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Because the sperm of older men continue to divide and the older sperm undergo more frequent mutations, older fathers are more likely than younger fathers to have children who develop schizophrenia. 
The common variant mechanism of disease illustrates that both schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders result when many common polymorphisms of a number of different genes act together to increase risk. Unlike the rare mutation, which exerts an outsize effect on risk, each of these common variants exerts only a very small effect. The strongest evidence for the common variant mechanism comes from the collaborative study of schizophrenia. These scientists have studied associations between schizophrenia and millions of common variants in the genomes of tens of thousands of individuals. Approximately one hundred gene variants related to schizophrenia have already been found. In this respect, the genetics of schizophrenia closely mirrors that of other common medical conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease, stroke, and autoimmune disorders. 
For a while, the rare variant and common variant mechanisms of disease were thought to be mutually exclusive, but recent studies of autism, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder suggest that each disorder has an underlying genetic risk, quite apart from any rare genetic variation caused by copy number variations or de novo mutations (chapter 1, table 1). The underlying risk for schizophrenia, for example, is 1 percent, or 1 in 100 people in the general population. The relative contribution of rare and common genetic variations to underlying risk is somewhat different for each disorder, but certain characteristics seem to be universal. Common variations, each of which carries a small risk, contribute to the disorder in relatively large numbers of people, whereas rare mutations, each of which carries a larger risk, typically contribute to the disorder in fewer than 1 in 100 affected individuals. 
Perhaps the most surprising recent finding uncovered by the large collaborative effort on the genetics of schizophrenia is that some of the same genes that create a risk for schizophrenia also create a risk for bipolar disorder. What's more, a different group of genes that creates a risk for schizophrenia also creates a risk for autism spectrum disorders. 
So here we have three different diagnoses—autism, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder—sharing genetic variants. This overlap suggests that the three disorders have other features in common early in life. 
DELETED GENES 
One out of every four thousand babies is born with a piece of chromosome 22 missing from its genome. The amount of DNA that is missing can vary, but it usually involves about 3 million DNA building blocks, known as base pairs, resulting in the loss of between thirty and forty genes. Because the missing DNA is from a region near the middle of the chromosome, at a location designated q11, people with the deletion are said to suffer from 22q11 deletion syndrome. 
The syndrome can cause highly variable symptoms. Almost everyone with the deletion has abnormalities of the head and face, such as cleft lip or cleft palate, and over half have cardiovascular disorders. They also display cognitive deficits that range from impaired working memory and executive function, as well as mild learning disabilities, to mental retardation. About 30 percent of adults with the syndrome are diagnosed with psychiatric disorders, including bipolar disorder and anxiety disorders. But schizophrenia is by far the most prevalent disorder. In fact, the risk of schizophrenia in a person with 22q11 deletion syndrome is twenty to twenty-five times greater than the risk of schizophrenia in the general population. 
To find out which genes might be responsible for the various medical problems associated with the syndrome, scientists looked for an animal in which to model the deletion. It turns out that a segment of DNA in chromosome 16 in the mouse has almost all of the genes present in the q11 region of chromosome 22 in humans. By deleting a different section of the region from different mice, the scientists were able to generate several mouse models of the human syndrome. 
The models revealed that the loss of a transcription factor—a protein involved in gene expression—is responsible for many of the non-psychiatric medical conditions suffered by humans, including cleft palate and some heart defects. Many scientists are now using mouse models to determine whichspecific genes within the 22q11 region, when missing, contribute to schizophrenia. Considering the prevalence of schizophrenia in people with this deletion, the scientists have a good chance of identifying those genes. 
In 1990 David St. Clair, then at the University of Edinburgh, and his colleagues described a Scottish family with a high prevalence of mental illness. [5] Thirty-four members of the family carry what is known as a balanced autosomal translocation. This means that pieces of two different non-sex chromosomes have broken off and switched places. Of the thirty-four family members who carry this particular translocation, five were diagnosed with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (schizophrenia plus mania and/or depression) and seven with depression. 
The researchers identified two genes that are disrupted by the translocation: DISC1 (disruption in schizophrenia 1) and DISC2 (disruption in schizophrenia 2). Although this particular translocation has been found in only one family, that family's unusually high incidence of psychiatric disorders suggests that these two genes, and other genes close to where the chromosomes broke, may be responsible for psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia and in mood disorders. Two separate groups of researchers found another genetic clue: some polymorphisms in the DISC1 gene occur together frequently and seem to contribute to the risk of schizophrenia. [6] So far, studies have been focused on the DISC1 gene because the DISC2 gene does not produce a protein; however, the DISC2 gene is thought to play a role in regulating the DISC1 gene. 
Numerous studies in fruit flies and mice have found that DISC1 affects a variety of cell functions throughout the brain, including intracellular signaling and gene expression. DISC1 is particularly important in the developing brain: it helps neurons migrate to their proper location in the fetal brain, to position themselves, and to differentiate into various cell types. Disruption of the DISC1 gene compromises its ability to perform these critical developmental functions. 
Taken together, the mouse models show quite clearly that the disrupted functions of the DISC1 gene lead to deficits typical of schizophrenia. In addition, all of the models show changes in brain structure that are similar to the ones observed in people with schizophrenia. Brain-imaging studies of one model, for example, show the enlarged lateral ventricles and smaller cortex seen in people with schizophrenia. Another model shows that disrupting the gene's function soon after birth produces abnormal behavior in the adult animal. The apparent role of the DISC1 gene in schizophrenia and thefindings in mice are consistent with the idea of schizophrenia as a disorder of brain development. 
GENES AND EXCESSIVE SYNAPTIC PRUNING 
Normal synaptic pruning, in which the brain trims unneeded connections between neurons, is extremely active during adolescence and early adulthood and takes place primarily in the prefrontal cortex. As we have seen, people with schizophrenia have fewer synapses in this area of the brain than unaffected people do, so researchers have long suspected that synaptic pruning is excessive in schizophrenia. 
Recently, Steven McCarroll, Beth Stevens, Aswin Sekar, and their colleagues at Harvard Medical School provided further evidence in support of this idea. They also described how and why pruning may go wrong, and they have identified the gene responsible. [7] 
The researchers focused on a particular region of the human genome, a locus called the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). This complex of genes on chromosome 6 encodes proteins that are essential for recognizing foreign molecules, a critical step in the body's immune response. The MHC locus, which had been strongly associated with schizophrenia in previous genetic studies, contains a gene called C4. The activity of the C4 gene—that is, its level of expression—varies significantly among individuals. The researchers wanted to find out how variations in the C4 gene are related to its level of expression and whether its level of expression is related to schizophrenia. 
McCarroll, Stevens, Sekar, and their colleagues analyzed the genomes of more than sixty-four thousand people with and without schizophrenia and found that the people with schizophrenia were more likely to carry a particular variant of the C4 gene known as C4-A. This finding suggested that C4-A may increase the risk of schizophrenia. 
Earlier studies had found that proteins produced by genes in the MHC locus play a role in immunity and are involved in synaptic pruning during normal development. This raised a critical question: What exactly is the role of the protein product produced by the C4-A gene? To answer the question, scientists bred mice without the gene. They observed less-than-normal synaptic pruning in these mice, indicating that the protein's role is to promote pruning and suggesting that too much of the protein leads to excessive pruning. In studies of these mice McCarroll, Stevens, Sekar, and their colleagues also found that during normal development the C4-A protein"tags" the synapses to be pruned. The more active the C4 gene is, the more synapses are deleted. 
Together, these studies suggest that overexpression of the C4-A variant leads to excessive synaptic pruning. Excessive pruning during late adolescence and early adulthood—when normal synaptic pruning kicks into overdrive—changes the anatomy of the brain and accounts for both the late onset of schizophrenia and the thinner prefrontal cortex of people with the disorder. 
Carrying a gene variant that facilitates aggressive pruning is not enough in itself to cause schizophrenia; many other factors are also at work. But in a small subgroup of people, one specific gene—the C4-A gene—gives rise to anatomical changes that lead to schizophrenia. Thus, McCarroll, Stevens, Sekar, and their colleagues have given us the first real inroad into the etiology of schizophrenia, an inroad that may eventually lead to new treatments. Moreover, important studies such as these inspire other researchers who are trying to use genetics to advance our understanding of psychiatric disorders. [8] 
MODELING THE COGNITIVE SYMPTOMS OF SCHIZOPHRENIA 
Earlier, we learned that excessive dopamine production may contribute to the development of schizophrenia and that antipsychotic drugs produce their effects by blocking dopamine receptors in the mesolimbic pathway. We also learned that brain-imaging studies have found both more dopamine and more D2 receptors in the striatum of people with schizophrenia. Moreover, in at least some people, the greater-than-normal number of D2 receptors may be determined genetically. In light of these findings, Eleanor Simpson, Christoph Kellendonk, and I set out to determine whether an excessive number of D2 receptors in the striatum causes the cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia. [9] 
To do so, we created a mouse model containing a human gene that overexpresses D2 receptors in the striatum. We found that this transferred gene, or transgene, impairs in the mouse the same cognitive processes that are affected in people with schizophrenia. In addition, the mouse lacked motivation, a deficit that is characteristic of the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. But the most interesting result was that whereas the motivational deficits disappeared once the transgene was switched off, the cognitive deficits did not—they persisted long afterward. In fact, the action of the transgene during the period of prenatal development alone was sufficient to cause cognitive deficits in adulthood. 
These findings suggest three important new ideas. 
First, excessive action of dopamine in the mesolimbic pathway, resulting from an overabundance of D2 receptors, could be the main cause of schizophrenia's cognitive symptoms—because this pathway connects to the prefrontal cortex, the site of the cognitive symptoms. Second, antipsychotics that block D2 receptors ease the positive symptoms of schizophrenia but have little, if any, beneficial effect on the cognitive symptoms. Why? Because this medication is given too late in development—long after irreversible changes have taken place. Third, because cognitive and negative symptoms are strongly correlated in people with schizophrenia, they may be caused by some of the same factors. 
All of these remarkable manipulations—creating deletions, inserting transgenes, and increasing the number of D2 receptors in mice—are just some of the many tools scientists are now using to discover the causes of schizophrenia, depression, and bipolar disorder. In a larger sense, these manipulations are beginning to give us some insights into the relationship of brain science to cognitive psychology, of the relationship of brain to mind. 
LOOKING AHEAD 
Before moving on to considerations of other brain disorders, it is worth reexamining some of the important contributions research has made to our understanding of the healthy brain from studies of autism spectrum disorders, mood disorders, and schizophrenia. 
The importance of brain imaging can scarcely be overestimated. Our understanding of where and how psychiatric and autism spectrum disorders affect the brain has advanced hand in hand with advances in imaging technology. And because imaging studies generally compare the brains of people with and without a particular mental disorder, they have given us additional insights into the healthy human brain as well. Imaging has advanced to the point where it can show us what regions, and sometimes even what neural circuits within those regions, are essential for normal functioning. 
Imaging has also confirmed that psychotherapy is a biological treatment— that it physically changes the brain, as drugs do. Imaging has even predicted, in some cases of depression, which patients are best treated with drugs, with psychotherapy, or with both. 
We have also seen how critical insights into the nature of depression and schizophrenia came about by accident, when drugs designed to treat anotherdisorder were observed to have an effect on patients with these brain disorders. Subsequent research on how the drugs act in the brain revealed important biochemical underpinnings of depression and schizophrenia and led to better treatments for people with these disorders. 
Advances in genetics are uncovering how genetic variations—whether common or rare—create a risk of developing complex brain disorders. Particularly fascinating is the discovery of shared genes that operate in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and in schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders. Such insights into the molecular nature of depression and schizophrenia have also improved our understanding of normal mood and of organized thought. 
Finally, we are again reminded of how much we owe to animal models of disease. Genetic studies of social behavior in animals have shown that some of the same genes that contribute to social behavior in animal models also contribute to our own social behavior; mutations in those genes may therefore be involved in autism spectrum disorders. Recent studies of schizophrenia, in particular, have relied heavily on mouse models for vital clues to the causes of this disorder of thought and volition. 
In a larger sense, the studies of autism, depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia—and the brain functions they affect—have yielded profound insights into the nature of our mind and our sense of self. These insights are informing a new understanding of human nature and thereby contributing to the emergence of a new humanism.

REFERENCES
For a general discussion on schizophrenia, see Steven E. Hyman and Jonathan D. Cohen, "Disorders of Thought and Volition: Schizophrenia," in Kandel et al., Principles of Neural Science, 1389–1401. 
1. Elyn R. Saks, The Center Cannot Hold: My Journey through Madness (New York: Hyperion, 2007), 1–2. 
2. Irwin Feinberg, "Cortical Pruning and the Development of Schizophrenia," Schizophrenia Bulletin 16, no. 4 (1990): 567–68. 
3. Jill R. Glausier and David A. Lewis, "Dendritic Spine Pathology in Schizophrenia," Neuroscience 251 (2013): 90–107. 
4. Daniel H. Geschwind and Jonathan Flint, "Genetics and Genomics of Psychiatric Disease," Science 349, no. 6255 (2015): 1489–94. 
5. David St. Clair et al., "Association within a Family of a Balanced Autosomal Translocation with Major Mental Illness," Lancet 336, no. 8706 (1990): 13–16. 
6. Qiang Wang et al., "The Psychiatric Disease Risk Factors DISC1 and TNIK Interact to Regulate Synapse Composition and Function," Molecular Psychiatry 16, no. 10 (2011): 1006–23. 
7. Aswin Sekar et al., "Schizophrenia Risk from Complex Variation of Complement Component 4," Nature 530, no. 7589 (2016): 177–83. 
8. Ryan S. Dhindsa and David B. Goldstein, "Schizophrenia: From Genetics to Physiology at Last," Nature 530, no. 7589 (2016): 162–63. 
9. Christoph Kellendonk et al., "Transient and Selective Overexpression of Dopamine D2 Receptors in the Striatum Causes Persistent Abnormalities in Prefrontal Cortex Functioning," Neuron 49, no. 4 (2006): 603–15.
